Mathematicians expedite their special business by deviating from ordinary language. Each such departure is prompted by specific considerations of utility for the mathematical venture afoot. Such reforms may be expected to reflect light on the ordinary language from which they depart, and the light reflected is all the brighter for the narrowly utilitarian character of the reforms. For in each case some special function which had hitherto been only incidentally and inconspiciously performed by a construction in ordinary language now stands boldly forth as the sole and express function of an artificial  notation. As if by caricature, inconspicuous functions of common idioms are thus isolated and made conspicuous.

Thus consider the mathematician's use of parentheses to indicate grouping. Once this systematic device is in the forefront of our minds, we gain clearer insight into the purpose or survival value of certain related devices of ordinary language. We come to appreciate, for instance, that the pair of particles 'either-or' is not just a redundant elaboration of the simple 'or', but that the 'either' does the useful work of a left-hand parenthesis marking the beginning of the compound whose connective is 'or'. It is the 'either' that enables us verbally to resolve the ambiguity of 'p and q or r'. It enables us to draw the distinction between 'either p and q or r' and 'p and either q or r' - precisely the distinction which would be shown with parentheses as '(p and q) or r' versus 'p and (q or r)'. The analogous purpose is served by the particle 'both' in connection with 'and'; thus '(p or q) and r' and 'p or (q and r)' come out as 'both p or q and r' and 'p or both q and r'. This insight into the syntactical function of 'either' and 'both' could, of course, perfectly well have been vouchsafed us even if we had had no acquaintance with the method of parentheses; but they are likelier insights for the parenthesis-minded. Here, then, is a first crude instance of how the artificialities of mathematical notation may be expected to encourage syntactical insights into ordinary language.

